# AVR32DU14/AVR16DU14 AVR DU - That's U for USB
These are one of those parts that leave you very little ambiguity about whether it's the right part for the job. Do you need USB? Then you need to DU the DU, cause as far as AVR is concerned, it's this, or classic AVR, and nobody wants to use those. And the DU-family of parts is absolutely a respectable product line. But the fact remains, that if you don't need USB, there is something cheaper, better at what you do need, usually both. USB exacts a very heavy price - but it obviously allows functionality that is otherwise entirely impossible, that of directly interacting with personal computers, so you will be able to:
	* Spoof Keyboards and Mice
	* Act as a virtual USB serial port
	* Make a USB DMX device
	* Program over USB pending availability of a bootloader suitable for such
	* For the true wizards, the option to make an entirely custom USB device awaits you.

Currently, there is no support for the USB available as part of the core yet, that is the top priority new feature, but one which I feel totally unqualified to write.

**Until there is is at least one library available with some sort of USB functionality, the only reasonable thing to do with this core and a DU microcontroller is to develop such a library.**
Once that has been done, it will open scores of new use cases.


## Pin Mapping / Pinout
`[DU14 Pin Mapping](DU14.png "Arduino Pin Mapping for AVR DU14")`
**Image not available - absent help we do not foresee being able to provide any sort of pinout diagram for this or future parts**
**Please help**


## Features and Peripherals
|                                  | AVR[16|32]DU14        |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------|
| Flash Memory                     | 16384 or 32768        |
| Flash Memory (with USB Bootload) | TBD                   |
| SRAM                             | 2048 or 4096          |
| EEPROM                           | 256                   |
| User Row                         | 512                   |
| Boot Row                         | 256                   |
| Max. Frequency (rated, MHz)      | 24                    |
| Clock Sources                    | INT, EXT, XTAL        |
| Packages Available               | TSSOP, SOIC-N         |
| Total pins on package            | 14                    |
| I/O Pins (not reset/UPDI/USB)    | 7                     |
| USB-related pins                 | 3                     |
| Power, Ground, Programming pins  | 4                     |
| Fully async pins                 | All                   |
| Reset as Input (never output)    | Yes                   |
| UPDI as I/O Pin                  | Yes (Requires HV)     |
| PWM capable I/O pins             | 5                     |
| Max simultaneous PWM outputs     | 4: 2:2                |
| 16-bit Type A Timers - pins ea   | 1: 2:1:2:0            |
| 16-bit Type B Timers, (pins)     | 2                     |
| 12-bit Type D pins               | None (USB ate it)     |
| USART (pin mappings)             | 2: 2/1                |
| SPI (pin mappings)               | 1: 1                  |
| TWI/I2C (pin mappings)           | 1: 2  (No dual mode)  |
| 10-bit ADC input pins            | 5                     |
| Of those, neg. diff. inputs      | Unknown               |
| 10-bit DAC                       | None                  |
| Analog Comparator (AC)           | 1                     |
| Zero-Cross Detectors (ZCD)       | 1                     |
| Custom Logic Blocks (LUTs)       | 4                     |
| Event System channels (out pins) | 6 (6)                 |
| On-chip opamps (OPAMP)           | None                  |
| MVIO, pins                       | No                    |
| Flash Endurance                  | 1,000                 |
| LED_BUILTIN (and optiboot led)   | PIN_PC3               |

### I/O Pins
Standard Dx-series I/O pins with INLVL support and PINCONTROL. But you sure don't get many of them....

#### I/O pin list:
* Power, Ground
* DM, DP, VUSP (The USB pins)
* PA0, PA1 (Crystal, if used)
* PC3
* PD4-PD7
* PF6, PF7 (Reset, UPDI)


### Fully async pins
All pins are fully async, able to wake from sleep without clock on Rising and Falling edges not just change and low level, able to respond to events shorter than 1 system clock, amd demomstrate accordigly less noise immunity. On earlier parts only pins 2 and 6 in each port were

### USART0 mux options
Hey, we get two options here! All normal I/O pins other PC3 gets a piece of USART0 on the 14-pin parts!
| USART0  | swap |  TX |  RX | XDIR | XCK |
|---------|------|-----|------|-----|------|
| DEFAULT |   0  | PA0 | PA1 | ~PA2~ | ~PA3~ |
| ALT3    |   3  | PD4 | PD5 |  PD6 | PD7
| NONE    |   5  | -   | -   |   -  |  -  |


### USART1 mux options
*You mean mux **OPTION**!*
Yes, that, be glad it's on PD6 and 7 not PF6 and 7!

| USART1  | swap |  TX |  RX | XDIR | XCK |
|---------|------|-----|-----|------|-----|
| ALT2    | 2    | PD6 | PD7 |   -  |  -  | Treated as the default, as options 0 and require PC0, PC1 or PC4 and PC5, none of which are available.
| NONE    | 3    | -   | -   |   -  |  -  |


### SPI0 mux options
SPI0 had been swaggering around like he was some sort of movie star after what he got on the DD-series PORTMUX. Well, the DU sure cut him down to size...
On the 14-pin parts, SPI is reduced to a single option on the 14 pin parts.

| SPI0    | swap | MOSI | MISO | SCK |  SS |
|---------|------|------|------|-----|-----|
| ALT4    | 4    |  PD4 |  PD5 | PD6 | PD7 | Treated as the default, as options 0, 1, 2, and 3 all require pins we don't have available.


### TWI0 mux options
A bit confining on 14 pin. Just a bit.

Not that the single mapping option should surprise anyone, seeing as there is strong precedent for "no pins no feature". As for losing dual mode, I bet USB got into a fight with that the TWI over something and he pulled some strings and got him exiled from the design. Speaking more seriously, I think there was likely concern that it would be hard to accommodate the need for timely processign of both at once. The point of dual mode is - as I understand it - that people want to use AVRs to wrastle other TWI devices, and aggregate the data for communication, likely at a different logic level, over I2C. But this is the DU. The purpose of the DU isn't to play dispatch between TWI and TWI. it's to play dispatch between USB and whatever. So....

| Mapping | swap | Master or Slave   |
|---------|------|-------------------|
| ALT3    | 3    | SDA/PA0 SCL/PA1   |


### TCA mux options
Well,  I think you can all guess which option we'd want to default, heh.....

| TCA0    | WO0 | WO1 | WO2 | WO3 | WO4 | WO5 |
|---------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| PORTA   | PA0 | PA1 |
| PORTC   |  -  |  -  |  -  | PC3 |  -  |  -  |
| **PORTD** | **PD0** | **PD1** | **PD2** | **PD3** | **PD4** | **PD5** |

Note that due to what utter garbage the PWM is under other


It is strongly recommended to not have any PWM output enabled involving either the timer being moved nor the pins it is being moved to when setting `PORTMUX.TCAROUTEA`. In the latter case, you will not be able to turn off the existing PWM through the API functions. Simple assignment can and should be used to write to the PORTMUX.TCAROUTEA register if (and only if) your code is not intended for use on any parts with more than 1 TCA. This is the only bitfield there, so you needn't worry about stomping on the other timer configuration.

``` c++
uint8_t tcaroutea = PORTMUX.TCAROUTEA; // Registers are volatile variables, so we want to load it like this
tcaroutea &= ~PORTMUX_TCA0_gm; // mask off the bits we're changing change
tcaroutea |= PORTMUX_TCA0_PORTx_gc; // and then set them to their new value.
PORTMUX.TCAROUTEA = tcaroutea; // then write the temp variable back to the register.
// above construction will likely take 7 clocks and 6 words - lds, andi, ori sts.
// The naive PORTMUX.TCAROUTEA &= ~PORTMUX_TCA0_gm; PORTMUX.TCAROUTEA |= PORTMUX_TCA0_PORTx_gc; is much less efficient
// It compiles to lds andi sts lds ori sts: 12 clocks and 10 words, since it has to write out and reload the values.
```

#### TCB mux options
Same as susual. Guess what pins we don't have here? Yes, that's right, the usual.

| TCBn | Default | Alt1 |
|------|---------|------|
| TCB0 |  ~PA2~  | ~PF4~ |
| TCB1 |  ~PA3~  | ~PF5~ |

Default mappings are used, since PF4/5 are shared with the preferred TCA pins, which take priority. These are NOT PORTMUX-aware. Only the **bold** pin can be used without modifying or creating a new variant file.

The type B timers are much better utility timers than PWM timers. TCB1 is the default millis timer and cannot be used for PWM in that mode. We're definitely timer-starved on these parts, with only 2 TCB, and with the TCD having been fed to the USB peripheral.

There is no TCD. (It and the PLL driving it was last seen being shoved over thee ciff into the maw of Native USB),

### LED_BUILTIN
To match other parts, `PIN_PA7` shall be the pin that the core "expects" to be connected to an LED. If you want to have a different pin be recognized by the application (this does not change the bootloader - you would still need to do a custom build of that too), this can be overridden if a custom board definition is created by passing `-DLED_BUILTIN=(some other pin)` as part of build_extra_flags, building via the CLI, or by equivalent means provided by other third party development environments.

### Bootloader Options
None for now.

### The ADC took it in the shorts.

It's structured like an Ex-class ADC. But it lost it's whole differential section, plus two bits.

## Official Documentation
When all else fails, read the real documentation. They keep moving the .pdf files around, so now I just link to the prduct page, from whence the datasheet, errata, and "technical briefs" are linked.

**Datasheets and errata change. You can sign up to get emails about such changes through the Microchip PCN system; if you don't, be sure to always use the latest version of the datasheet and especially the errata**

* AVR32DU14 - Product page not available
* [AVR16DU14](https://www.microchip.com/en-us/product/avr16du14)

At a minimum, everyone using a modern AVR should plan on having a PDF viewer open with the datasheet, and a text editor with a good search function and the ioavr______.h file open so that when you're trying to use a constant, but the compiler says it isn't declared/defined, you can search the io header for a key phrase in the constant and figure out how it was spelled/formatted or copy/paste it to your sketch. (see [the IO headers](./ioheaders) for more information and links to them. I also keep the AVR instruction set manual open in the PDF viewer as well as the silicon errata and datasheet clarification. Datasheet clarifications are a bigger deal than an erratum, usually. An erratum says "Okay, this doesn't work, but it will some day, maybe" while a datasheet clarification says "This would be an errata, but we're not even going to pretend that we'll fix it some day". But watch out - datasheet clarifications vanish from the list once the datasheet has been updated!

The "Technical Briefs" are [somewhat inconsistent](https://github.com/SpenceKonde/AVR-Guidance/blob/master/TechnicalBriefs.md) in their value, but some are quite good. Still waiting on one about how to get the best out of the ADC - they seem allergic to making quantitative recommendations.
